Nowhere to Go:
Maternity Care Deserts
Across the US
2024 REPORT

The Huguley family
Aleeshia Huguley is pregnant in a county with low
access to maternity care, where there is limited
access to hospitals or birth centers that offer
obstetric care and obstetric clinicians. She and her
husband Serkeith, are concerned about being so far
away from the only birthing hospital in their area—
which serves four surrounding counties.
“To people in low-access areas, it’s a struggle,”
Serkeith says. “Not everyone has the same equal
medical care or the same equal accessibility. We
can have the same doctor, but we don’t have the
same journey to get to this doctor.”
Due to her high-risk pregnancy, Aleeshia has weekly
doctor appointments. Her community’s lack of
resources means her struggle with access to care
won’t end with childbirth—she also worries about
getting her new baby to regular appointments.
Aleeshia and Serkeith’s story underscores the
broader issue of maternity care deserts in America.
The emotional and physical toll on parents is
significant, exacerbated by the long distances to
hospitals. The couple aims to raise awareness about
these challenges, hoping to improve access to care
for families in similar situations.

Scan to learn more about the
Huguley Family’s experience being
pregnant in a low access area.

Executive Summary
Our latest national report on maternity care access in
the United States (US) reveals a stark reality; where you
live matters when it comes to the options available for
maternity care. While some progress has been made
to increase access to care, such as expanding and
extending Medicaid, we continue to witness steady
reports of obstetric unit closures and workforce
shortages. In fact, 1 in every 25 obstetric units in the
US shuttered their doors in the last 2 years, resulting
in fewer choices, increased stress, and greater travel
times for birthing people. The 2024 Nowhere to Go:
Maternity Care Deserts in the US report reveals that
over 35% of counties are considered maternity care
deserts. This means that in 1,104 US counties, there
is not a single birthing facility or obstetric clinician.
These counties are home to over 2.3 million women
of reproductive age and are the resident county of
women who gave birth to over 150,000 babies in 2022.
Our most comprehensive analysis to date confirms that
women living in maternity care deserts and counties
with low access to care have poorer health before
pregnancy, receive less prenatal care, and experience
higher rates of preterm birth. Our analysis revealed
an excess of over 10,000 preterm births among those
living in maternity care deserts and limited access
counties in 2020-2022. These findings affirm that US
systems, policies, and environments are failing moms
and babies.
Over 1 in 3 US counties lack a single obstetric clinician,
and in many parts of the country obstetriciansgynecologists (OB-GYNs) and family physicians who
deliver babies are leaving the workforce. Moreover,
while midwives could supplement the obstetric
workforce, 23 states have policies that inhibit them

from administering the level of care they were trained
to provide. Furthermore, 70% of birth centers in the
US are within just 10 states. Our report examines
policies that reduce barriers to integrating midwives
into the healthcare system and make opening and
sustaining birth centers more attainable. Both could
provide more options for birthing people, decrease
health expenditures, and improve satisfaction and birth
outcomes. In addition, the report offers insights into
how low insurance reimbursement rates and payment
structures contribute to hospital closures, especially in
rural areas.
Improved access and increased options for care are
possible. March of Dimes will continue to lead the fight
to improve health for all moms and babies. As a nation,
we must redefine a positive pregnancy experience
beyond mere survival, striving for an environment
free from discrimination irrespective of geographical
location, insurance status, sexual orientation, or
racial and ethnic background. The data in this report
underscores the need for immediate action to improve
the pregnancy and birth experience for moms
nationwide.

March of Dimes urges
policymakers, healthcare
providers, and communities
to work together to ensure
that all moms and babies
receive quality care.

3

Table of contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 ​
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
How to use the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Measures and components of access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Maternity care deserts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Maternity care access score ​. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Obstetric hospitals and birth centers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Obstetric clinicians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
​
21
Health insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ​27
Travel time to care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ​​29
Fertility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Chronic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Social drivers of health and racism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Policy solutions and actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Abbreviations and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Ashley Stoneburner, MPH, Ripley Lucas, MPH, Jazmin Fontenot, MPH, Christina Brigance,
MPH, and Erin Jones, JD for the development of the content in the report. Thanks to Andrea L. DeMaria, PhD,
MS, Emily Frost, MPH, Motoko Oinuma and Danielle Procopio, MPH for writing, reviewing, and editing the
report. March of Dimes would also like to thank Rachelle Marina Johnson for her help with report design
and experience. ​
Suggested citation: Stoneburner A, Lucas R, Fontenot J, Brigance C, Jones E, DeMaria AL. Nowhere to Go:
Maternity Care Deserts Across the US. (Report No 4). March of Dimes. 2024. https://www.marchofdimes.org/
maternity-care-deserts-report ​

4

Introduction

Key findings

The United States (US) is experiencing a maternity care
access crisis along with rising rates of poor maternal
health outcomes. Now more than ever, workforce
shortages and hospital closures are an everyday reality
in the US, particularly in rural areas. Inequities in birth
outcomes and maternal mortality by race, ethnicity,
and payer source persist and serve as a reminder that
racism and discrimination are experienced by far too
many birthing people when seeking care. Although
policy changes, including Medicaid expansion and
extension provide more birthing people access to
health insurance than ever before, the reversal of
Roe v. Wade has resulted in changes in reproductive
healthcare for millions of women and impacted the
obstetric workforce.

35% of US counties are maternity care deserts.​

Ensuring consistent, high-quality maternity care
is essential to safeguard the health of pregnant
people and the 3.6 million babies born each year
in the US. In addition to the over 800 maternal
deaths that occur each year, the infant mortality rate
increased significantly in 2022 for the first time in
two decades. With adequate access to timely and
appropriate care, many of these deaths are preventable.

•

Nowhere To Go: Maternity Care Deserts Across the US
continues to expand education and awareness about
areas without access to care. By diving into data and
explaining barriers that keep women with too few
options, knowledge becomes the catalyst for action.
The report examines how factors like fertility rates,
chronic disease, and social drivers of health (SDOH)
influence access to care and for the first time, maternity
care access and its association with birth outcomes
are explored. Policy actions and recommendations
that can improve access to care are also incorporated
throughout the report.
March of Dimes recognizes that using the term desert
to describe counties is limited and can oversimplify the
complex issues faced by communities most impacted
by the maternity care crisis. “Maternity care desert” is
used to align with prior reports. March of Dimes uses
the term desert to refer to a quality or ability to fail
(someone), especially at a crucial moment when most
needed, in the context of maternity care availability.

More than 150,000 babies were born to birthing people
living in maternity care deserts.​
•

An additional 200,000 babies were born to birthing
people living in counties with limited maternity
care access.

More than 2.3 million reproductive aged women live in
maternity care deserts. ​
•

Over 3 million additional women live in counties with
limited maternity care access.

•

Living in a maternity care desert is associated with a 13%
increased risk of preterm birth.

Over half of counties in the US do not have a hospital that
provides obstetric care.
In 2021 and 2022, approximately 1 in 25 obstetric units
closed nationwide.

Nearly 70% of birth centers are located within just 10 states.​
2.5 million reproductive aged women live in a county
without an obstetric clinician.
•

Only 27 states and DC grant full practice authority to
Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs).​

The average percent of uninsured women in maternity
care deserts is 2 times the rate of those living in areas
with full access.
On average, birthing women in the US travel 16 minutes
by car to their nearest birthing hospital without traffic.
•

Driving time increases to 26 and 38 minutes, on
average, for rural and maternity care desert residents,
respectively. ​

•

States with significantly longer travel times included
North Dakota, Montana, Mississippi, South Dakota,
and Nevada. ​

Fertility rates in rural counties and maternity care deserts
are higher than urban and full access counties and are
decreasing at a slower pace.
Chronic conditions related to poor health outcomes, like
pre-pregnancy obesity, hypertension, and diabetes, have
increased significantly since 2015 and are most common
among women living in maternity care deserts.​
•

These conditions are most prevalent among Black and
American Indian/Alaska Native birthing people.

5

How to use this report

Educate
Gain insights from the thorough examination of maternity care access in
the US to raise awareness about the ongoing maternity health crisis.

Plan
Develop targeted programs and interventions to enhance access in areas
with unmet needs and identify opportunities for collaboration.

Advocate
Leverage the policy recommendations and data to advocate for changes
within communities and states.
Look for the megaphone on ways to take action.

Allocate
Make informed resource allocation decisions to improve the health of
moms and babies.

6

Measures and components of access
This report explores access to maternity care within the
context of healthcare access, defined as the “timely
use of personal health services to achieve the best
possible health outcomes”.1

to illuminate access challenges while also providing
valuable data to strengthen programmatic decisions,
allocate resources, support advocacy, and encourage
research efforts. ​

The report examines maternity care access using 2
measures that quantify the need for maternity care
services in each county. The first is March of Dimes
maternity care access designations and the second is
a continuous measure based on a 6-factor index score
created in 2022 by the Health and Resources Service
Administration (HRSA) to classify counties with need
for maternity care.2 Together, these measures continue

While not exhaustive, Figure 1 illustrates the individual
key factors affecting maternity care access analyzed
throughout this report. Each segment examines
specific topics, incorporating recent data, and
exploring the influence of state and federal policies
and SDOH. This report aims to highlight the challenges
in ensuring that everyone has equitable and timely
access to maternity care. ​

Figure 1. Key factors affecting maternity care access

Tr

ns

Social drivers
of health

are
oc
et
tim
el
av

Chro
nic
co
nd
iti
o

ty o f h
ilabilirth cenospitals
a
v
ters
A and bi

state and
federal policy

t
Fer
ilit

yr
at
es

A
st vai
e t la b
r i c ili
c li ty o f
nic
ia n s

and

ob

He al
t h i n s u ra n c e
c overage

7

Maternity care access
Maternity care deserts
March of Dimes maternity care access designations
are based on 3 factors: the ratio of obstetric clinicians
to births, the availability of birthing facilities, and the
proportion of women without health insurance. Each
county is classified into 1 of 4 categories: full access,
moderate access, low access, or maternity care desert
(Table 1). ​
Over one third (35.1%) of the 3,142 US counties are
considered maternity care deserts, areas without
a single birthing facility or obstetric clinician.
Approximately, 6 in 10 maternity care deserts are rural,

less populated areas. These 1,104 counties are home
to over 2.3 million women of reproductive age. In
2022, more than 150,000 babies were born to women
residing in maternity care deserts, comprising 4.1%
of total births (Figure 2). Furthermore, roughly 1 in 10
birthing people reside in counties without full access to
maternity care. Each birth represents a person or family
required to travel beyond their community for prenatal
care, delivery, and postpartum care, facing challenges
not encountered by those in areas with full access to
maternity care.

Table 1. Maternity care access designations
Maternity care
desert

Low access

Moderate access

Full access

Hospitals and birth centers
offering obstetric care

zero

<2

<2

≥2

Obstetric clinicians per
10,000 births*

zero

<60

<60

≥60

Proportion of women 19-54
without health insurance

any

≥10%

<10%

any

*Obstetric clinicians include OB-GYNs, CNMs/CMs and family physicians who reported delivering babies.

Figure 2. Number and percentage of US counties (N=3,142) designated as maternity care deserts and the
reproductive-aged women and babies living in these counties
1,104 counties

150K babies

2.3M women

35.1%

3.6%

4.1%

Counties

Women

Babies

Note: Percentages are calculated from the following totals: 3,142 US counties, 65 million reproductive-aged women, and 3.6 million babies born
in 2022.

8

Maternity care access

Over 35% of US counties are maternity care deserts
Figure 3. Maternity care access designation by county, US and Puerto Rico

Maternity care access
Maternity care deserts
Low access to care
Moderate access to care
Full access to care

States with the
highest percent
of maternity care
deserts

73.6%

57.6%

51.9%

51.6%

51.3%

50.7%

Note: From left to right - top row: North Dakota, South Dakota, Oklahoma;
bottom row: Missouri, Nebraska, Arkansas.

9

Maternity care access
Demographic characteristics, including race/ethnicity
and household income, vary by maternity care
access designation. Nearly 1 in 10 babies was born to
American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) women living
in areas without access, compared to fewer than 1 in
25 babies in the US, overall. AI/AN birthing people are
also more likely to live in low and moderate access
counties; nearly 1 in 5 births among AI/AN women in
2022 was to those living in counties without full access
to care.
The median household income among people living in
maternity care deserts was $53,329, 9.5% lower than
the national average ($58,938) and 15.6% lower than in

counties with full access ($63,164). Furthermore, the
proportion of uninsured reproductive-aged women
is higher in maternity care deserts and low access
counties, at 15% and 19% respectively, compared to
11.9% in full access counties. Additionally, nearly two
thirds of maternity care deserts are rural (Figure 4).
These findings suggest that residents of maternity
care deserts face geographical barriers and significant
financial obstacles when seeking care.
The following section examines the association
between maternity care access and the utilization of
prenatal care and preterm birth.

Geographical and demographic characteristics vary
by access designation
Figure 4. County demographics by maternity care access designation, US
11.9
Uninsured
women
19-54 years
(%)

7.1
19.0
15.0

26.7

Rural
counties (%)

14.1
23.2
59.0

63,164
Median
household
income ($)

61,657
53,941
53,329

Maternity care access

Full access
Moderate access
Low access
Maternity care desert

Sources: US Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Area Health Resources Files, 2022-2023 file; American Board of Family
Medicine, 2019-2022; American Association of Birth Centers, 2023; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Plan and Provider
Enumeration System (NPPES), November 2023 file; National Center for Health Statistics, 2022 final natality data; US Census Bureau, 2022
American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates; American Hospital Association, 2022.​
Note: Puerto Rico not included in US estimates.

10

Maternity care access

Prenatal care utilization in maternity care deserts
Following the recommended schedule for prenatal
care (PNC) has been shown to minimize the risk of
pregnancy complications and improve outcomes for
both mom and baby.3 The utilization of PNC is assessed
using the Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization (APCU)
Index, which ranges from inadequate* to adequate
plus. The index examines the month of PNC initiation
and the number of PNC appointments attended.4
Research suggests that younger individuals, those with
less education, fewer economic resources, or living in
disadvantaged communities are less likely to receive
adequate PNC. Additionally, racism within maternity
care systems impacts the use of PNC among minority
populations.5 As routine PNC became more common
in the 1990s, early reports found that Black women
initiated care later and attended fewer visits than their
White peers.6 This trend persists today, with 21.9% of
Black women receiving inadequate PNC compared to
11.1% of White women between 2020 and 2022.

Inadequate PNC is also associated with where a person
lives, with 1 in 6 (15.8%) babies in maternity care
deserts and 1 in 5 (17.6%) babies in low access counties
not receiving adequate care from 2020 to 2022
(Figure 5). This led to over 130,000 babies being born
without adequate care, with 18,000 (13.8%) receiving
no PNC at all. Those living in maternity care deserts
and low access counties faced a 14% and 12% higher
risk of receiving inadequate and no PNC, respectively,
compared to those in full access counties. Still,
unacceptably high rates of inadequate PNC persist
in counties with full access to maternity care as well,
underscoring the need for nationwide education and
outreach efforts to increase PNC utilization regardless
of geographical location. Low and moderate access
counties are distinguished by their high and low
proportions of uninsured women. The difference in
inadequate PNC rates between these two types of
counties highlights how crucial it is for women to have
health insurance both before and during pregnancy.

Birthing people in maternity care deserts and low access
counties are most likely to receive inadequate PNC
Figure 5. Inadequate PNC by maternity care access designation and amount of PNC received,
US, 2020-2022
Inadequate prenatal care rate (percentage of live births)
18

*Prenatal care is “inadequate”
when care begins in the fifth
month of pregnancy or later
or when less than 50% of the
appropriate number of visits
are received (adjusted for the
infant’s gestational age).

12

6
Solid bar indicates percentage
with inadequate PNC
Hatched bar indicates
percentage with no PNC

0
Maternity care
desert

Low

Moderate

Full

Total

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, final natality data, 2020-2022.
Note: Inadequate prenatal care includes no prenatal care.

11

Maternity care access

Preterm birth in maternity care deserts
In the US, 1 in 10 babies is born preterm, or before 37
weeks gestation.7 Preterm birth rates vary greatly by
state and range between 8.2% in New Hampshire and
14.8% in Mississippi (2022 data). There are significant
disparities in preterm birth rates across different
racial and ethnic groups, with Black birthing people
experiencing a rate of 14.6% from 2020 to 2022,
which is 1.5 times higher than the rate observed
among all other babies. Local policies and resources
play a significant role in determining who can access
healthcare and the quality of care they receive, which
has an impact on birth outcomes, including preterm
birth. This influence can be direct, like delays in care
due to Medicaid enrollment procedures, or indirect,
such as initiatives promoting culturally sensitive
healthcare.8–10
Living in a maternity care desert or low access county
is associated with a 13% and 11% increased risk for
preterm birth, respectively, compared to living in a full
access county. Between 2020 and 2022, over 11% of
live births to women living in counties with no or low
access were born preterm compared to 10.2% in full
access counties. Over 51,000 preterm babies were

born to people living in maternity care deserts during
this time, and another 65,000 to people living in low
and moderate access counties. Elevated preterm birth
rates among those living in maternity care deserts, low,
and moderate access counties account for more than
10,000 excess preterm births when compared to the
preterm birth rate of full access counties.
Preterm birth rates by race and ethnicity follow a
similar trend when examined by access level and
decrease as access increases. Babies born to Black
birthing people in maternity care deserts have a 12%
higher preterm birth rate than those born in full access
counties (Figure 6). The same is true for babies born to
White birthing people in maternity care deserts, who
have a 15% higher rate than those in full
access counties.
While not all preterm births are preventable, disparities
in preterm birth rates by geography and race/ethnicity
illustrate a need for targeted interventions to address
the inequitable burden within communities across
the US.

Preterm birth rates are higher in maternity care deserts than
full access counties for all race/ethnicities
Figure 6. Preterm birth rates by maternal race/ethnicity and maternity care access designation, US,
2020-2022
API
AI/AN

Maternity care
deserts

Black
Full access

Hispanic
White
Total
0

2

4

6

8

Preterm birth rate (percentage of total live births)

10

12

14

16

18

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, final natality data, 2020-2022.
Notes: API=Asian/Pacific Islander; AI/AN=American Indian/Alaska Native.

12

Maternity care access

Maternity care access score
Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs), as
designated by HRSA, represent areas where primary
medical providers are scarce. Following the
determination of primary care HPSAs, a Maternity
Care Target Area (MCTA) index score is calculated
to quantify each county’s need for maternity care.
Index scores are based on 11 data components
encompassing 6 factors (Table 2) that range from 0 to
25, with the highest score indicating a greater need.2
These scores are used to inform the distribution and
placement of eligible National Health Service Corps
(NHSC) clinicians who provide maternity care services.
In this section, need for maternity care is examined as
a continuous measure, referred to as a maternity care

access score​, based on a modified MCTA criteria (see
technical notes). ​
There are 780 US counties currently classified as
primary care HPSAs. Nearly half (48.2%) of maternity
care desert counties, 23.4% of low access counties,
and 17.6% of moderate access counties were also
identified as shortage areas by HRSA. The average
maternity care access score among US counties was
10.6, ranging from 0 to 23. Maternity care access
scores differed by designation level, highlighting gaps
in care, (Figure 8) with the highest average score
among maternity care deserts (15.1) and the lowest
average score among full access counties (9.7).

Table 2. Maternity care access score factors and definitions​
Factor

Definition

Population to maternity care
clinician ratio

The number of reproductive-aged women compared to the number of
maternity care clinicians.

Income level

The percentage of people at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL).

Travel time and distance to care

The time/distance a person would travel by car to the closest maternity care
hospital.

Fertility rate

The number of births per 1,000 reproductive-aged women.

Maternal Vulnerability Index
(MVI)

Maternal vulnerability to poor maternal and infant health outcomes. See more
on page 35.

Maternal health indicators

The proportions of birthing people with pre-pregnancy diabetes, obesity, and
cigarette smoking, and that initiated prenatal care in the first trimester.

Population to behavioral health
professional ratio

The number of reproductive-aged women compared to the number of mental
health professionals.

Maternity care Maternity care access score
20
deserts have
15.1
the highest
14.1
15
maternity care
access score of 10
all designations

11.3

9.7

5

Figure 8. Maternity care
access score by maternity
care access designation

0

Maternity care
desert

Low

Moderate

Full

13

Maternity care access
Maternity care access scores are highest in the
southern region of the US, with most states scoring
above 13 points. Mississippi had the highest average
maternity care access score (14.9), followed by
Arkansas (14.0), Louisiana (14.0), Oklahoma (13.9), West
Virginia (13.9), and Kentucky (13.7). ​

The Northeast accounted for 7 of the top 10 states
with the lowest scores. When examining each of the 6
factors individually (Appendix), maternity care deserts
had the highest average score, or most need, in the
following categories: behavioral/mental health provider
access, fertility, driving distance to a hospital, and
availability of obstetric clinicians.​

Areas with the most need for maternity care are concentrated
in the south of the country
Figure 7. Maternity care access score by county, US

Maternity care access score

0

More access

25

Less access

Sources: US Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Area Health Resources Files, 2022-2023 file; American Board of Family
Medicine, 2019-2022; American Association of Birth Centers, 2023; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Plan and Provider
Enumeration System (NPPES), November 2023 file; National Center for Health Statistics, 2022 final natality data; US Census Bureau, 2022
American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates; Surgo Health Maternal Vulnerability Index.

14

Maternity care access

Comparing two counties

Both counties below have the same maternity care access
score of 15. The underlying data that comprises their scores
helps tell a story of their differences.
Saint Landry, LA

5

2

Saint Landry’s data indicates
a high proportion of people
in poverty (50% under
200% FPL), high maternal
vulnerability (92nd percentile),
and high rates of hypertension
(7.6%) and obesity (38.2%).

5

2

1
0
Poverty

MVI

Behavioral
health

Fertility

0
Distance/
time to care

Maternal
health

Clinician
ratio

Greenlee, AZ
Greenlee is a county
characterized by a complete
lack of obstetric clinicians,
long driving times (55.7
minutes to the nearest
birthing facility, on average),
and high fertility (83 births
per 1,000 women).

5

5

3
2

0

0

0

Poverty

MVI

Behavioral
health

Fertility

Distance/
time to care

Maternal
health

Clinician
ratio

Examining counties through this lens can provide nuance on the issues impacting access to maternity care.
Program planners, community leaders, policymakers, and researchers must understand the populations they serve,
their needs, and where they face access limitations. For counties like Greenlee, opportunities exist to improve
access to clinicians through solutions like telehealth prenatal care appointments or subsidized rideshare trips for
in-person appointments.11,12 For a parish such as Saint Landry, solutions targeting the community’s welfare and
general health or programs that incentivize preventative healthcare, could help bolster residents’ access to basic
needs and improve their overall health prior to pregnancy.13,14
Note: Each factor has a possible score range following HRSA methodology: poverty (0-5 points), MVI (0-2), behavioral health (0-1), fertility (0-2),
distance/time to care (0-5), maternal health (0-5), clinician ratio (0-5). For more information, please see Technical Notes.

15

Availability of obstetric hospitals
and birth centers ​
Obstetric hospitals
Across the nation, the closure of hospital obstetric units has played a role in the crisis of access to maternity care,
resulting in fewer options for birthing people and increased barriers to finding care. In 2022, there were over 2,500
hospitals with obstetric services in the US. However, despite 97.7% of births occurring in hospitals, 52% of counties
do not have a hospital with an obstetric unit (Figure 10). The disparity is even greater within rural areas, where
67.4% of counties lack a single obstetric hospital. In 2022, nearly 6 million women of reproductive age, and 1 in 10
babies born, lived in counties without hospital obstetric services.

Over half of all US counties do not have a hospital that
provides obstetric care
Figure 10. Distribution of hospitals providing obstetric care by county, US and Puerto Rico

Hospitals providing obstetric care
0 obstetric hospitals
1 or more obstetric hospitals
Source: American Hospital Association, 2022.

16

Availability of obstetric hospitals and birth centers ​
Obstetric unit closures can reduce access to essential
prenatal care, lead to delays in emergency treatment,
and contribute to overcrowding in nearby hospitals.
However, in some cases, closures may lead to positive
outcomes if they divert patients to hospitals offering
higher quality care or those with specialized services
and staff.15 In 2021 and 2022, there were at least 107
obstetric unit closures nationwide. While closures
occur in both urban and rural counties, rural residents
often rely on the shuttered hospital as their sole option
for care, intensifying the impact on access for these
communities. In fact, this was the case for 72.0% of
rural hospitals that experienced closure. The primary
reasons cited for closures include low birth volume,
insufficient reimbursement rates from insurance
providers, and a shortage of staff such as obstetricians,
family physicians, and nurses.16
In 2022, 41.0% of all births were paid for by Medicaid.
Reimbursement rates are lower for Medicaid than
other private insurers.17 Because of this, facilities
and clinicians caring for lower income patients face
exceptional challenges in generating revenue for
obstetric services.18 Alternative payment models or
changes to reimbursement rates could make retaining
obstetric units more affordable for health systems.

In 2021 and 2022,
approximately 1 in 25
obstetric units closed
nationwide

Take action: Learn more about
payment reform on page 38

“We are the closest hospital for four
counties in this area. We know that
women who have to travel farther
for care are at a higher risk for
adverse perinatal outcomes.”
Dr. L. Joy Baker, Obstetrician-Gynecologist
at Wellstar Health System in Georgia

Scan to learn more about Dr. Baker’s experience
as a clinician in a low access area.

17

Availability of obstetric hospitals and birth centers ​

Birth centers
Birth centers provide maternity care services for
pregnancies free of active complications, or maternal
and fetal factors that place the pregnancy at increased
risk for complications.19 Care at birth centers
follows the midwifery model, which focuses on nonmedicalized, low-intervention care.20 Compared to
low-risk birthing people in hospitals, those who receive
care in birth centers have lower rates of preterm
birth, low birthweight, and Cesarean birth, and higher
rates of breastfeeding and satisfaction with care.21
Furthermore, birth centers are generally communitycentered and focus on providing culturally competent
care, resulting in fewer reports of discrimination
compared to hospital-based systems.22
In addition to improving birth outcomes, birth centers
offer an opportunity for cost savings. Conservative
estimates found a 16% cost reduction for every birth
center birth compared to hospital care, totaling a
potential savings of over $11 million for every 10,000
births paid by Medicaid.23 Yet, in 2022, Medicaid
covered only 17.9% of all birth center deliveries,
significantly lower than the proportion of hospital
births paid by the same source (41.5%).
Despite the benefits of birth centers, many states have
policies that create barriers to opening and operating
them. Coverage for care at licensed birth centers is
a mandatory Medicaid benefit. However, 9 states do
not currently license birth centers.24,25 For those in
states without licensed birth centers, access to care
is diminished. While most states allow licensing of
birth centers, some requirements become barriers
when they are either cost prohibitive or too difficult
to achieve. The American Association of Birth Centers
(AABC) outlines best practices for birth center licensing
and advocates for states to promote their success by
excluding prohibitive regulations.25

“One of my biggest fears and
concerns going to Lubbock was
what if I deliver on the way there?”
Kali Bautista lives in Brownfield, Texas, 45 minutes
from a birthing hospital in Lubbock. She opted to
receive care at a birthing center rather than traveling
to Lubbock to deliver.

Scan to learn more about her experience
living in rural Texas.

Take action: Learn more about
birth center regulations on page 40

18

Availability of obstetric hospitals and birth centers ​
Birth center births comprise less than 1% of all births in
the US. Although small, the percentage of births that
occur in birth centers is increasing.26 In fact, from 2017
to 2022, the number of birth centers births increased
20%, from 19,878 births to 23,945. Still, there are just
416 licensed birth centers spread across 270 counties
(8.5% of counties) and less than 5% are situated
in rural areas. In Alaska, over 5% of births occur in
birth centers, the highest proportion of all states.
Approximately 70% of all birth centers are located
within 10 states, where the number of birth centers
ranges from 10 in Wisconsin to 89 in Texas (Figure 11).

Great opportunities exist to broaden the reach of
birth centers to communities of color or those facing
economic hardship. Currently, birth center births
occur primarily among non-Hispanic White and
college-educated women or those who can self-pay
for services (Figure 12). Expanding the ownership and
management of birth centers by Black, Indigenous,
and people of color (currently estimated to be less
than 5%) and diversifying the staff can enhance their
integration into communities that could benefit from
their services.22,27

Approximately 70% of all birth centers are located
within 10 US states
Figure 11. Number of birth centers by state, US

Birth centers by state
0
1-9
10+

Source: American Association of Birth Centers, 2023.

19

Availability of obstetric hospitals and birth centers ​

Birth center births occur more often among those who are
White, non-Hispanic and college educated, compared to
hospital births
Figure 12. Demographic characteristics of women with live births by birth location
College educated

Medicaid

White, non-Hispanic

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

Percentage of live births

Birth centers

Hospitals

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, final natality data, 2022.

20

Availability of obstetric clinicians
Obstetric clinicians
A looming concern affecting access to maternity
care is a shortage of obstetric clinicians, primarily
obstetricians-gynecologists (OB-GYNs), certified
nurse-midwives (CNMs), certified midwives (CMs)
and family physicians. Nearly half (47.0%) of all US
counties lack an OB-GYN, and 61.8% lack a CNM or
CM. Despite a growing population of reproductiveaged women, the obstetric workforce fails to
keep pace with demand, largely due to dwindling
numbers of obstetric physicians and obstacles in
integrating the midwifery model of care into the US
health system.28,29
In 2021, an estimated 2.5 million women of
reproductive age lived in counties without an
obstetric clinician, and nearly 158,000 births
occurred to women living in these counties (Figure
13). Rural counties face disproportionate challenges,
with 57.7% (n=675) lacking an obstetric clinician
compared to 23.8% (n=469) of urban counties. In
total, over 36% (n=1,144) of US counties have no
obstetric clinician and an additional 10.5% (n=331)
have only 1, putting women at risk of losing maternity
care if the clinician leaves the community (Figure
14). Arkansas (98.1), Oklahoma (101.2), Alabama (102),
Mississippi (106.1), and Texas (107.5) had the lowest
number of obstetric clinicians per 10,000 births.

“It’s not uncommon for me to get
a call that the mom just delivered
at the gas station, and then I just
wait for them at the emergency
department.”
Dr. Kristy Acosta, Family medicine and obstetric
care clinician at Brownfield Regional Medical Center
in Texas

Scan to learn more about her experience
as a clinician in a low access area.

21

Availability of obstetric clinicians

Over 36% of US counties lack an obstetric clinician ​and
1.2 million women live in counties with only one ​
Figure 13. Distribution of obstetric clinicians by county, US

Obstetric clinicians per 10,000 births
>60 obstetric clinicians
30-60 obstetric clinicians
>0-30 obstetric clinicians
0 obstetric clinicians

Figure 14. Counties with 1 obstetric clinician, US

Counties with 1 obstetric clinician
1 obstetric clinician
More than 1 or no clinicians

Note: Obstetric clinicians include OB-GYNs, CNM/CM, and family physicians who reported delivering babies. ​
Sources: US Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Area Health Resources Files, 2023; American Board of Family Medicine,
2018-2021; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Plan and Provider Enumeration System (NPPES), November 2023 file; National
Center for Health Statistics, 2022 final natality data. ​

22

Availability of obstetric clinicians

Obstetrician-gynecologists
In 2022, OB-GYNs nationwide delivered over 85% of live
births. However, the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) projects a shortage of
12,000 to 15,000 OB-GYNs by 2050, citing factors
such as burnout, retirement, and physicians leaving
obstetric services due to demanding schedules, low
compensation, and increasing liability concerns.30
Declines in access to OB-GYNs for birthing people have
been most pronounced in rural counties across many
states (Figure 15). In fact, the number of OB-GYNs per
10,000 births in rural counties is half that of urban
counties (59.2 vs. 118.1 per 10,000 births). Between

2010 and 2021, 20 states experienced a decrease in the
ratio of OB-GYNs to births in rural counties, with states
like Alabama seeing reductions of up to 65%. During
the same period, 30 states, including Massachusetts
and Pennsylvania (as seen below), experienced
increased OB-GYN ratios in urban counties compared
to rural ones. Few states, however, have shown
improvements in the rural OB-GYNs workforce. One
example is Alaska, which saw a 161% increase in the
ratio of OB-GYNs to births in rural counties, rising from
19.3 to 50.3 OB-GYNs per 10,000 births.

Changes over time in the OB-GYN workforce vary by state
and rurality
Figure 15. Ratio of OB-GYNs per 10,000 births by rurality, selected states, 2010-2021
Urban counties

Rural counties

OB-GYNs per 180
10,000 births
131.3
89.9

Alaska

50.3
19.3
0
180
134.5

154.4

161.8

86.5

Massachusetts

0
180
115.4

133.1

Pennsylvania
47.1
0
2010

2021 2010

26.6
2021

Sources: US Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Area Health Resources Files, 2023; National Center for Health Statistics,
2010-2021 final natality data.

23

Availability of obstetric clinicians
The 2022 Supreme Court reversal of Roe v. Wade,
which gives states the right to create policies related to
abortion access, continues to impact how and where
OB-GYNs train and deliver care.31 In states with the
most restrictive abortion laws, physicians face severe
consequences, including the potential risks of losing
their medical licenses and imprisonment for providing
abortions, including ones that are medically necessary.
OB-GYNs in these states have reported clinical and
personal impacts related to practicing in the uncertain
legal climate, and many have reportedly considered
changing where they practice.32 Recent data from

2021 reveals that states where abortion is prohibited
had fewer OB-GYNs per 10,000 births (92.0 OB-GYNs)
compared to states where abortion rights are upheld
(138.4 OB-GYNs), underscoring existing disparities in
physician accessibility. States with abortion restrictions
have experienced notable decreases in applications
for obstetric residencies, partly due to the inability
to provide training in abortion care, highlighting the
impact of these restrictions on medical education and
the future obstetric workforce.33,34 Collectively, these
issues contribute to a shrinking workforce and an
inadequate pipeline of OB-GYNs.

Family physicians practicing in rural counties are more likely
to report delivering babies compared to those practicing in
urban counties
Family physicians
While OB-GYNs comprise over 70% of the obstetric
workforce, family physicians also play a crucial
role, particularly in rural communities. Even so, the
proportion of family physicians trained to provide
obstetric services has sharply declined. Decades ago,
over 45% of family physicians reported caring for
obstetric patients, now only 7% of family physicians
report delivering babies across the US.35 Family
physicians practicing in rural counties are more
likely to report delivering babies compared to those
practicing in urban counties (Figure 16). Moreover,
family physicians account for 1 in 4 obstetric clinicians
in rural counties compared to just 1 in 20 in urban
counties. ​

​In July 2023, HRSA announced $11 million in funding
to strengthen the family physician workforce by
supporting the development of 15 new residency
programs in rural areas. Among these, 3 will focus
on enhancing obstetrical training specifically in rural
communities.36 In addition to expanding training
opportunities for family physicians, addressing
barriers such as challenging credentialing processes,
lifestyle concerns, and limited job availability involving
obstetric duties is essential for the integration of
obstetrics into their practice.37

Figure 16. Percentage of family physicians that reported delivering babies by rurality

17%

6%

Rural counties

Urban counties

Source: American Board of Family Medicine, 2019-2022.

24

Availability of obstetric clinicians

Midwives
Certified Nurse-Midwives (CNMs) and Certified
Midwives (CMs) are clinicians who are trained to
provide nearly all essential care for women and
newborns.38 In contrast to many other developed
countries where midwives attend most births, only
10.9% of births in the US are attended by midwives.
This is a stark contrast from the early 19th century
when the midwifery care model was primarily used in
pregnancy and childbirth.39 The benefits of midwifery
care include a higher likelihood of spontaneous
vaginal delivery and lower rates of birth interventions
like Cesarean sections, instrumental deliveries, and
episiotomies. Compared to women who received other
models of care, women treated by midwives have
been shown to report more positive experiences and
higher satisfaction overall.40 Further, midwifery care is
particularly relevant in AI/AN and Black communities,
where midwives uphold important traditions and

principles of reproductive justice.41,42
Despite the potential for improved outcomes, barriers
persist in integrating the midwifery model of care into
the US health system.43 CNMs are eligible for licensure
everywhere in the US, however CMs are eligible for
licensure in just 11 states and DC. Currently, 27 states
and DC grant CNMs full practice authority, allowing
them to practice independently to the full extent
of their education and training within a healthcare
system, which includes prescribing medication
(Figure 17). In the remaining states, CNMs are required
to practice under the supervision of, or collaboratively
with, a physician.44 These restrictions impact the supply
of midwives and prevent women from accessing
midwifery care.
Take action: Learn more about
midwife policy on page 41

Twenty-seven states and DC have policies that allow CNMs
full practice authority
Figure 17. States granting midwives full practice authority, US

Full practice authority
Yes
No

Source: American College of Nurse
Midwives, 2024.
Note: Full practice authority is considered
when CNMs have prescribing authority
and when there is no physician supervised
transition to practice period required.

25

Availability of obstetric clinicians
Moreover, Medicaid reimbursement rates for perinatal
services vary across states and clinician types, with pay
parity—equal reimbursement rates for physicians and
midwives—being implemented in only 31 states and
DC (Appendix).45 A study examining the relationship
between state regulations and midwifery access found
that maximum Medicaid parity was correlated with
higher rates of midwife attendance at birth regardless
of licensing statues.46 To better integrate midwives
into the obstetric workforce, it is imperative that
health systems grant midwives hospital privileges,
allowing them to admit patients and to be considered

medical staff.43 Finally, fostering a culture that supports
midwifery care is pivotal to the successful integration
into hospitals and health systems across the country.
Over 60% of all US counties do not have a CNM/
CM. The proportion of births attended by CNMs/
CMs by state is shown in Figure 18. Arkansas (0.4%),
Alabama (1.8%), and Mississippi (1.9%) have the lowest
percentage of births attended by midwives while
Alaska (27.4%), Vermont (27.2%), and New Hampshire
(24.2%) have the highest proportion of births attended
by midwives.

Of all US births, 10.9% were attended by a CNM/CM in 2022
and rates vary by state
Figure 18. Percentage of midwife attended births by state, US, 2022

Births attended by
midwives (%)
>0.40%-7.7%
>7.7%-11.8%
>11.8%-14.7%
>14.7%-27.4%

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, 2022 final natality data.

26

Health insurance coverage
Continuous insurance coverage extending before and
after pregnancy is essential for healthcare affordability
and can lead to better health outcomes.47 Still, an
estimated 11.5% of women of reproductive age are
uninsured in the US. Women without insurance are
more likely to delay or forgo healthcare due to costs,
increasing their risk for poor health outcomes.48
Throughout the last decade, Medicaid expansion and
extension have improved access to health insurance for
women.49,50 Expanding Medicaid reduces the income
requirements for qualifying for the program, making
more individuals eligible and enabling a broader
population to afford healthcare. Medicaid expansion is
associated with increased health insurance coverage
before pregnancy, earlier initiation of prenatal care,
and reductions in unintended pregnancies and stress
from bills.51,52

Medicaid extension (the option to continue Medicaid
benefits up to 1 year postpartum) increases access to
care for conditions that occur after pregnancy. States
with extension policies that include coverage for
mental health services can help reduce racial inequities
in maternal and infant morbidity and mortality.52,53
Research suggests that maintaining Medicaid coverage
postpartum leads to higher utilization of prescription
medication and outpatient mental health services
for perinatal mood and anxiety disorders (PMAD), a
condition impacting approximately 1 in 7 moms.54
Screening and identification of postpartum mental
health conditions is particularly important, given they
are the leading underlying causes of pregnancy-related
death.55

“For the majority of my pregnancies
I went to Crow for all of my care.
Closer to the birth we were
transferred to Billings because
there was no other place closer
with those services and resources.
We had to travel two hours.”
Vania Biglefthand lives in Colstrip, Montana, 2
hours from a birthing hospital in Billings. At 29
weeks, Vania’s water broke unexpectedly and
she was put on bedrest and had to remain at the
hospital. Vania found it hard to be by herself, away
from her husband and two boys.

Scan to learn more about her
experience living in Montana.

27

Health insurance coverage
In December 2022, the Consolidated Appropriations
Act was passed making the American Rescue Plan
Act of 2021 permanent and giving states the option
to extend Medicaid postpartum coverage from 60
days to one year.56 The Act facilitates state adoption of
the program by providing federally matched funding,
making extension more affordable for states. As of
July 2024, 46 states, and DC, have extended Medicaid
and all but 10 states have expanded Medicaid.56,57
Disparities in access to insurance are a result of the
Medicaid policies adopted throughout US states.

Figure 19 shows the percentage of uninsured women
of reproductive age by state. Of the 10 states with the
highest rates of uninsured women of reproductive
age, 6 of them have not expanded Medicaid and 3
(South Dakota, North Carolina, and North Dakota) have
recently expanded in 2023 and 2024. In 2022, the
proportion of uninsured reproductive-aged women
in states that expanded Medicaid was 9%, compared
to 17% in states that did not expand Medicaid.
Approximately 1 in 4 (23.8%) women of reproductive
age in Texas are uninsured, the highest of all states.

Take action: Learn more about
Medicaid policy on page 39

States that have expanded Medicaid have lower rates of
uninsured women compared to those that have not
Figure 19. Percentage of uninsured reproductive-aged women by state, US

Percent uninsured
>3.0%-4.0%
>4.0%-8.2%
>8.3%-13.2%
>13.2%-17.0%
>17.0%-24.0%
Has not expanded
Medicaid

Source: US Census Bureau, 2022 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.

28

Travel time to care
During pregnancy and childbirth, longer travel time
is associated with negative health outcomes for
both moms and babies, including a higher risk of
maternal morbidity, stillbirth, and neonatal intensive
care unit (NICU) admission.58,59 Increased distance is
associated with a higher likelihood of unexpected outof-hospital births, which increases the risk of neonatal
morbidity.60,61 Further, the inability to reach care quickly
can cause financial strain on families and increased
prenatal stress and anxiety.62 The travel time needed to
reach care can vary based on several factors, including
reliance on public transportation, seasonal weather
conditions, traffic, health insurance restrictions, or the
need for more specialized care.

On average, birthing women in the US travel 15.9
minutes by car to their nearest birthing hospital
without accounting for traffic. In urban areas, the
average time to a birthing hospital is 15.3 minutes,
increasing to 26.2 minutes in rural areas. For birthing
people living in maternity care deserts, the average
time to care is 38.0 minutes, over 2 times the average
travel time (14.4 minutes) for birthing people living
in full access counties (Figure 20). Over two thirds
(66.4%) of birthing people living in maternity care
deserts live more than 30 minutes from a birthing
hospital, compared to only 9.0% of all birthing people
in the US (Figure 21). States with the greatest average
time to care include Alaska (39.2 minutes), West
Virginia (26.6 minutes), Wyoming (23.3 minutes), Hawaii
(22.9 minutes), and Montana (22.6 minutes).

People in maternity care deserts travel 2.6 times longer
to reach a birthing hospital than those living in full
access counties
Figure 20. Minutes to nearest birthing hospital, by maternity care access designation
Full access

14.4 minutes

Moderate access

23.2 minutes

Low access

23.7 minutes

Maternity care desert

38.0 minutes

29

Travel time to care

Two thirds of people
living in maternity
care deserts must
travel more than 30
minutes to reach care
Figure 21. Percentage of people who
must travel over 30 minutes to reach
their nearest birthing hospital

66.4%

9.0%

Maternity care deserts

US average

Alaska, West Virginia, Wyoming, Hawaii, and Montana
had the highest average travel time to a hospital providing
obstetric care
Figure 22. Travel time to nearest birthing hospital by county, US and Puerto Rico

Time
<15 minutes
15 - 30 minutes
31 - 60 minutes
>60 minutes
Not enough data

30

Travel time to care

Hot spot analysis
A hot spot analysis of travel durations across the continental US reveals spatial clusters with significantly longer
and shorter travel times to maternity care (Figure 23).63 Regions shaded in purple (hot spots) indicate where
travel to birthing hospitals takes considerably longer, highlighting potential accessibility gaps and infrastructure
challenges. Conversely, regions shaded in blue (cold spots) signify locations with notably shorter travel times,
suggesting quicker access to maternity hospitals by car. States with significant clusters of longer travel times
include North Dakota, Montana, Mississippi, South Dakota, Nevada, Colorado, Wyoming, Missouri, Oklahoma,
and New Mexico. In contrast, shorter travel times were concentrated in the Northeast, particularly in densely
populated metropolitan areas like New York, Connecticut, Maryland, New Jersey, and DC.

Areas in purple represent parts of the US with significantly
longer travel time to the closest birthing hospital ​
Figure 23. Areas indicating longer (purple) and shorter (blue) travel time to birthing hospitals

Clusters of longer and shorter travel time (minutes)
Areas with shorter travel times: extremely high confidence

Areas with longer travel times: high confidence

Areas with shorter travel times: very high confidence

Areas with longer travel times: very high confidence

Areas with shorter travel times: high confidence

Areas with longer travel times: extremely high confidence

Areas with travel times that are equal to the average

Not enough data

Sources: US Census Bureau, 2022 American Community Survey 5-Year Fertility Estimates, American Hospital Association, 2022.
Note: Confidence is based on statistical testing for spatial clusters of longer or shorter travel times compared to surrounding areas.

31

Declining fertility in the US
Several factors play a significant role in determining
a community’s demand for maternity care services.
While certain factors, such as the prevalence of chronic
diseases, can amplify this need, others, like declining
birth rates, may diminish it. The US fertility rate, or the
number of births per 1,000 reproductive-aged women,
has been declining for 15 years. Aside from a 1% uptick
in 2021, the rate has declined 16% since its peak in
2007, dropping from 65.0 births per 1,000 women to a
historic low of 54.4 births per 1,000 women in 2023.64
Decreasing fertility rates are a result of advances in
reproductive health and various social and economic
influences. Increased access to contraception has
resulted in lower fertility rates among teens and a
reduction in unplanned pregnancies.65 Increases in
educational attainment and employment opportunities
for women, coupled with economic uncertainty

and lack of affordable childcare options, have all
contributed to women having babies later in life or
not at all.66 In contrast, states with restrictions on
abortion have seen a rise in fertility rates. Data from
2023 suggests that births rose by 2.3%, on average,
in states enforcing total abortion bans compared to
states without bans.67 This change reflects a potential
increase in the need for maternity care services in
those states.
Fertility rates in both rural areas and maternity care
deserts surpass those in urban areas and counties with
full access to care. Furthermore, from 2017 to 2022,
fertility rates decreased by 2.7% in areas with no access
to maternity care, which is less than the 6.4% decrease
observed in full access counties. Figure 24 below
shows declining trends in fertility rates overall and by
maternity care access designation.

Between 2017 and 2022, fertility rates fell for most of the US​
Figure 24. Fertility rates by maternity care access designation, US, 2017-2022

Births per 1,000 reproductive-aged women
Low

66

Maternity
care desert
Moderate

60

Total
Full
54
2017

2019

2021

2022

Sources: National Center for Health Statistics, final natality data, 2017-2022; US Census Bureau, American Community Survey 5-year Population
Estimates, 2017-2022.

32

Chronic conditions
People with chronic conditions, such as hypertension,
diabetes, kidney disease, depression, and asthma,
often require additional medical supervision
during pregnancy, delivery, and postpartum.68
When pregnancy occurs alongside chronic illness,
the likelihood of complications, such as severe
maternal morbidities, or the necessity for medical
interventions like Cesarean birth and postpartum
hospital readmission, rises.69 Infants born to women
with chronic conditions can also experience adverse
birth outcomes, including preterm birth, fetal growth
restriction, macrosomia, birth defects, and even
death.70,71 ​
The prevalence of chronic diseases has been rising in
the US.68,72 Societal changes have resulted in women
having babies later in life when chronic conditions

become more prevalent.68,72–74 Additionally, exposure
to tobacco, poor nutrition, lack of physical activity,
and excessive alcohol use contribute to obesity, a
significant risk factor for the development of chronic
disease.71 According to data on live births, the
prevalence of pre-pregnancy conditions including
hypertension and diabetes rose by 81.3% and 50.0%,
respectively, between 2015 and 2022. In 2022, over
140,000 babies were born to women with prepregnancy hypertension or diabetes. While rates of
cigarette smoking among women of reproductive
age have declined over time (decreasing 60.7% from
2015 to 2022), obesity has been steadily increasing.
In 2022, 31.6% of babies were born to women with a
pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) over 30, the
biometric cut-off for obesity (Figure 25).​

Chronic health conditions have become more prevalent
among birthing people over time
Figure 25. Percentage of births with selected chronic conditions before pregnancy, US, 2015-2022
Diabetes

Hypertension
36
Percent
of births

0

Percent
of births

1.6

2.9

2015

2022

Cigarette smoking

0.8

1.2

2015

2022

Obesity

36

31.6
25.0

11.7
4.6
0

2015

2022

2015

2022

33

Chronic conditions
The overall prevalence of chronic hypertension and
diabetes among women who had a live birth in 2022
was 2.9% and 1.2%, respectively. Black (5.4% and 1.6%)
and AI/AN (3.8% and 2.9%) birthing people experienced
the highest prevalence of both chronic conditions
compared to all other races/ethnicities (2.5% and
1.7%). The rate of obesity and hypertension among API
women remains the lowest of all race groups but has
significantly increased in recent years. Between 2015
and 2022, the obesity rate among API increased by
50% from 9.9% to 14.8% and doubled for hypertension
(0.9% to 1.8%). Finally, while cigarette smoking rates
have declined significantly overall, not all races/
ethnicities have benefited equally. Still, 13.5% of AI/AN
birthing people reported smoking tobacco in the three
months before pregnancy (Appendix).
When comparing data by geography, women in rural
counties have a higher prevalence of pre-pregnancy
hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and cigarette smoking
compared to residents of urban counties. Smoking
prevalence among rural county residents is 2.6 times
higher than among urban county residents. The

disparity in smoking rates persists when comparing
residents of maternity care deserts to those living in full
access counties (10.8% vs. 4.1%) and birthing people
insured by Medicaid compared to those privately
insured (8.1% vs. 2.0%). Figure 26 shows the prevalence
of 1 or more chronic conditions by county.
To reduce the risk of complications for birthing people
and their babies due to chronic disease and associated
risk factors, ACOG and the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) recommend that
any clinician in contact with women of reproductive
potential include pre-pregnancy counseling and care.75
Pre-pregnancy care is an opportunity to optimize
health, address modifiable risk factors, and educate
individuals on maintaining a healthy pregnancy.
Healthy pregnancies begin long before conception,
and ensuring all women have access to preconception
care is essential to appropriately diagnose and
address chronic illness. Identifying populations with
higher rates of chronic health conditions can inform
programs, providers, and interventions to ensure
optimal outcomes for moms and babies.

One third of all birthing people had 1 or more chronic
health conditions prior to pregnancy
Figure 26. Prevalence of 1 or more chronic health conditions by county, US, 2020-2022

Chronic health
condition prevalence
>10.2%-36.7%
>36.7%-41.8%
>41.8%-46.2%
>46.2%-50.6%
>50.6%-72.5%
Not enough data

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, final natality data, 2015-2022.​
Notes: Chronic health conditions include cigarette smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and obesity. All conditions are indicated as pre-pregnancy
on the birth record.​

34

Social drivers of health
Social drivers of health (SDOH) are the conditions in
which people are born, grow, live, work, play, and age
that can impact health outcomes.76 The resources and
opportunities available in a community play a key role
in shaping the healthcare needs of its residents.77,78
While some community characteristics are protective,
such as social support, access to green spaces, and
safe and adequate housing, other SDOH can put
women and birthing people at risk for poor health
outcomes, like environmental pollutants and lack of
access to nutritious foods.78–80
Historically, efforts to improve SDOH-related maternal
and infant health outcomes have prioritized individual
prevention strategies over addressing the critical
upstream factors contributing to population-level
health disparities. While factors such as higher
income or education level typically correlate with
better health outcomes, studies reveal that these
advantages do not translate equally across all racial

or ethnic groups.78,81 Research indicates that even
among individuals with high socioeconomic status
and similar pregnancy diagnoses, morbidity and
mortality rates are disproportionately higher for Black
women, underscoring the need to address racism as an
underlying cause for many SDOH.81,82
To better understand and target these disparities,
tools like Surgo Health’s Maternal Vulnerability Index
(MVI) provide insight into the complex interplay
of socio-behavioral risk and maternal and infant
health outcomes (Figure 27). The MVI can be used
to identify areas where moms are vulnerable to poor
outcomes, including risk of preterm birth and death,
and inform targeted interventions to mitigate negative
health impacts.83 States with the highest maternal
vulnerability due to SDOH include New Mexico,
Nevada, Louisiana, New York, California,
and Mississippi.

Darker shaded areas show where women are at risk for poor
outcomes due to social drivers of health
Figure 27. Maternal
Vulnerability Index,
Socioeconomic
Determinants of
Health theme, by
county, US​

Maternal vulnerability
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
Very high

Source: Surgo Health Maternal Vulnerability Index, SDOH theme.

35

Social drivers of health

Racism
Race and ethnicity are not risk factors for maternal
outcomes, rather proxies for racism and racismrelated exposures.84,77 Racism is a root cause for many
SDOH, influencing socioeconomic environments,
institutional organizations, experiences of prejudice,
discrimination, and amplifying stress, all of which affect
health outcomes.85 Cumulative exposure to stress
and adversity due to racism, known as weathering,
contributes to the negative health outcomes seen
particularly among Black women and their infants
today.82,86,87 The historical and ongoing nature of racism
has led to environments that disproportionately create
social and economic disadvantages for people of color.
Structural and systemic racism, embedded within
institutional policies and practices, have long
influenced health outcomes by limiting access to
health-promoting activities and resources.88

Medical racism, a pervasive issue within healthcare
systems, significantly impacts the healthcare
experiences and outcomes for people of color,
especially during the perinatal period.89,90 Studies
demonstrate that medical racism contributes to delays
in diagnosis and treatment, dissatisfaction with care,
and dismissal of health concerns among Black women,
leading to serious complications during pregnancy
and postpartum.91–93 A 2023 Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention report found that 1 in 3 women
reported experiencing discrimination during maternity
care, with rates soaring to 40% among Black birthing
people.8 This systemic bias fosters distrust in the
healthcare system, delays care-seeking behaviors, and
undermines adherence to medical recommendations.94

Addressing medical racism necessitates promoting diversity
and cultural competence in the maternal health workforce.
This can be achieved through the following initiatives:

Embedding training into curriculum for all maternity care providers

Implementing anti-racism policies and protocols in all hospitals

Establishing feedback mechanisms to hold clinicians accountable

Diversifying the maternity care workforce

36

Policy solutions and actions
March of Dimes recommended policies
March of Dimes advocates for policy actions to improve the health outcomes of moms and babies across the US.
Urgent action by policymakers is essential to enhance services for birthing individuals and infants nationwide. The
following policy opportunities represent critical steps toward achieving these goals.

Addressing reimbursement and
administrative barriers

Exploring alternative payment
methods for maternity care

Adopting Medicaid extension and
expansion in all states

Reviewing state regulatory barriers to
maintain and establish birth centers

Expanding opportunities for full
midwifery integration

Investing in digital technologies
and telehealth

37

Policy solutions and actions

Improving Medicaid access for pregnancy care:
Addressing reimbursement and administrative barriers
To improve Medicaid access, policymakers should increase reimbursement rates and
streamline administrative processes for providers and institutions.
Low Medicaid reimbursement rates and cumbersome
administrative hurdles are associated with difficulty
accessing care for enrollees.95 Providers often
encounter more obstacles when billing Medicaid
than other insurers, contributing to access issues
as much as the program’s payment rates.96 In most
cases, Medicaid typically pays less than private health
plans for pregnancy and childbirth care,97 intensifying
financial challenges for hospitals, particularly in rural
areas where Medicaid is the predominant payer for
obstetric services.

These disparities in reimbursement and the varying
income eligibility criteria across states further
exacerbate inequalities in access to obstetric care,
especially in rural communities.98
Addressing these financial and administrative
challenges can increase the likelihood of Medicaid
enrollees, particularly those in rural areas, having better
access to essential pregnancy and childbirth care.

Alternative payment methods for maternity care:
Increase incentives and innovation for adopting value-based
payment models in maternity care
Policymakers, purchasers, payors, and providers should collaborate to leverage the
flexibility and innovation of various scalable and hybrid payment models.
Traditionally, providers in the US have been paid
through a “fee-for-service” (FFS) model, where they
receive payment for every covered service provided.
Alternatively, value-based payments (VBP) incentivize
providers to deliver cost-efficient, high-quality, and
coordinated care. Unlike the FFS model, VBP programs
offer greater flexibility for physician practices and
healthcare systems, reduce the pressure to increase
patient visit volume, and lower administrative burden.103
Effective VBP models are designed to include
evidence-based quality performance measures and
financial accountability, and they should be continually
implemented, evaluated, and refined.104 Providers
agree to take on a certain amount of financial risk while
gaining a more flexible payment structure that allows
them to tailor patient care to individual needs.105,106

Policymakers, purchasers, payors, and providers should
collaborate to leverage the flexibility and innovation
of various scalable models and hybrids, such as payfor-performance, limited population, episode bundles,
maternity care homes, and total cost of care models.
Although VBP is not a new concept, its adoption in
provider-focused maternity care services is increasing.
Additionally, expanding VBP within hospital settings,
which account for a large share of delivery costs,
presents a significant opportunity.105,107
By increasing incentives and fostering innovation in
VBP models, we can ensure that maternity care is more
cost-efficient, high-quality, and accessible, ultimately
improving outcomes for moms and babies.

38

Policy solutions and actions

Adoption of Medicaid extension and expansion in all states:
Ensuring comprehensive Medicaid coverage after birth
Congress must mandate 1 year of Medicaid coverage after birth nationwide and ensure all
states expand Medicaid requirements to cover individuals up to 138% of the FPL.
Medicaid extension after birth for 1 year: Recent
data indicates that 53% of pregnancy-related deaths
occur between 1 week and 1 year after delivery.55 In
some states, Medicaid maternity coverage ends just 60
days after childbirth, cutting off access to crucial care
during a period when risks of maternal complications
and death remain high. Comprehensive Medicaid
coverage should be extended to at least 12 months
postpartum, as provided for under the American
Rescue Plan Act.99 Ensuring every mom receives the
necessary coverage to maintain their health and wellbeing after childbirth should be a mandatory national
priority, not left to optional state discretion.
Medicaid expansion: Research shows that improving
the health of birthing individuals before pregnancy is
crucial for achieving healthy pregnancies.100 Expanding
Medicaid to cover individuals up to 138% of the federal
poverty level is vital to improve outcomes.
A national study revealed improvements in key prepregnancy health indicators among low-income
women following Medicaid expansion, including
increased access to pre-pregnancy health counseling,
higher rates of folic acid intake before pregnancy,
and increased use of effective contraception after
birth.101 Furthermore, research indicates that Medicaid
expansion has enhanced hospital financial stability and
reduced closure rates, particularly in rural counties
with previously high numbers of uninsured adults.102

46 states and DC have
extended Medicaid through
12 months postpartum

Idaho and Iowa are planning to
implement Medicaid extension
through 12 months postpartum.

Wisconsin currently extends
Medicaid only through 90
days postpartum.

Arkansas has not
taken action towards
extending Medicaid.

39

Policy solutions and actions

Birth centers: Expand access to accredited and licensed
freestanding birth centers by reviewing state regulatory barriers to
maintain and establish birth centers
Expanding birth centers will also require policymakers and stakeholders to examine state
midwifery regulations to eliminate further barriers to care.
While research supports the benefits of birth centers,21
many states have policies that create barriers to
opening and sustaining licensed freestanding birth
centers. These centers provide comprehensive
prenatal, delivery, postpartum, and overall
gynecological care, typically through the midwifery
care model.108

Texas, California,
Washington, Oregon, and
Florida have strong birth
center access policies

The Commission for the Accreditation of Birth Centers
(CABC) most often accredits licensed freestanding
birth centers. Although Medicaid covers licensed birth
centers, many still face reimbursement difficulties
due to low Medicaid reimbursement rates and
administrative burdens, including payment delays.109
States have different licensure requirements, and some
do not have accredited birth centers.
To increase access to birth centers, policymakers and
stakeholders should adopt the following measures to
eliminate prohibitive regulations:25,110,111
• Exempt birth centers from state Certificate of
Need requirements.
• Support the adoption of CABC accreditation,
evidence-based, high-quality practice measures
and regulations.
• Establish equitable Medicaid reimbursement fees
and support services at a minimum of 100% of the
Medicaid fee schedule.
• Establish and adopt standards for freestanding birth
center facility coding and contracting, and include
birth centers in preferred provider networks.
Addressing these regulatory and financial challenges
will allow us to expand access to accredited birth
centers to provide more comprehensive and highquality care for moms and babies.

40

Policy solutions and actions

Workforce: Expand opportunities for full midwifery integration
Removing regulatory barriers restricting and limiting midwifery practices is essential to
integrating midwives fully into the healthcare system.
The midwifery model of care is a crucial strategy
to improve access to maternity care, particularly in
underserved areas.112 Policy changes are necessary
to maximize the potential of midwives within the
healthcare workforce. This includes enabling
midwives to practice to the full extent of their
education, eliminating requirements for midwives to
be collocated with physicians, allowing telehealth
technologies, and ensuring equitable inclusion in
reimbursement systems.113

DC, Rhode Island, and Maine
have policies that support the
integration of midwives

To achieve full integration, addressing the following
regulatory and practice restrictions nationwide is
crucial for CNMs and CMs:113
• Review and adopt state statutes and hospital
policies that grant midwives full medical staff
privileges, including the authority to admit and
discharge patients independently and prescribe
medication.
• Amend state statutes to provide licensure for
CMs. By addressing these regulatory hurdles, we
can enable midwives to provide comprehensive,
accessible, and high-quality care to birthing people
across the US.
• Eliminate state statutes and licensing requirements
mandating midwives to establish contractual
relationships with physicians to practice
midwifery care.
• Adjust state regulations to ensure parity in
reimbursement rates between midwives and
physicians, both in private and public payor
systems, reimbursing midwives at 100% of the
physician rate for the same services.
By addressing these regulatory hurdles, we can enable
midwives to provide comprehensive, accessible, and
high-quality care to birthing people across the US.

41

Policy solutions and actions

Investing in digital technologies and telehealth:
Enhancing healthcare delivery through innovative solutions
Continued investment in innovative digital practices and technologies is crucial to
expanding access and providing more options for healthcare delivery, including telehealth,
remote patient monitoring (RPM), affordable broadband/internet access, and mobile apps,
with the integration of closed caption devices for disabled and hearing impaired individuals.
Telehealth plays a pivotal role in delivering highquality care for pregnant and postpartum individuals,
particularly benefiting underserved populations
vulnerable to poor health outcomes and those with
limited access to high-risk care.114 Its integration across
healthcare specialties like obstetrics, maternal-fetal
medicine, and mental health has been transformative.115
In maternity care, telehealth has enabled virtual
consultations with specialists, remote ultrasound
monitoring by maternal-fetal medicine experts,
postpartum blood pressure monitoring using Wi-Fi
connected devices, and fertility tracking through
patient-generated data.116

During the Public Health Emergency, Congress
established the Affordable Connectivity Program (ACP)
to provide eligible low-income households, especially
in rural areas, with affordable broadband and internet
services crucial for telehealth access. As of June 1,
2024, federal funding for ACP has ceased, although
some communication companies continue to offer
low-cost internet plans for enrollees. Congress should
prioritize extending funding for the ACP program
to ensure continued access to essential telehealth
services.117
Investing in digital technologies and telehealth is
critical for improving healthcare access and outcomes.
Renewed congressional support is required to ensure
universal access to essential services like telehealth
and broadband connectivity.

Call to action
By taking immediate action, policymakers can lay the foundation for a healthcare
system that provides accessible, equitable, and high-quality care for all moms and
babies across the US. This proactive approach will improve health outcomes and foster
a more resilient healthcare infrastructure capable of addressing the diverse needs of
all moms and babies in the 21st century. March of Dimes stands ready to collaborate
with policymakers, healthcare providers, communities, and families to advocate for and
implement these critical changes.

42

Conclusion
The findings in this report underscore the critical need
for equitable access to maternity care across the US.
Hospitals, birth centers, and the obstetric workforce
all play pivotal roles in ensuring that birthing people
receive the care they need, yet significant disparities in
access persist.
The US maternity care system faces significant
challenges, including clinician shortages, insufficient
insurance coverage, long travel times to care, rising
prevalence of chronic conditions, and the impact of
SDOH and racism. Over half of US counties lack a
hospital or birth center with obstetric services, creating
barriers to care, particularly in rural areas. Policies
that adequately address insurance reimbursement
rates and payment structure could prevent future
obstetric unit closures due to financial challenges.
Although birth centers offer a promising alternative,
with evidence indicating improved outcomes and cost
savings, numerous states have policies hindering their
establishment and operation. Diversifying ownership
and management of birth centers, coupled with
licensing policy reform, could enhance their integration
and broaden their reach.

The shortage of obstetric clinicians, including OBGYNs, midwives, and family physicians trained in
obstetric care, further compounds access issues.
Efforts to expand training opportunities, address
policy barriers, and promote diversity within the
obstetric workforce are imperative to bridging this
gap. Additionally, addressing systemic issues such as
insurance coverage, chronic illness before pregnancy,
and social drivers of health, including racism, are
critical steps toward ensuring all individuals have
access to quality maternity care and positive birth
outcomes.
The solutions to improving access to maternity care
are as diverse as the barriers. However, by addressing
these multifaceted challenges and implementing
targeted interventions and policy solutions, we can
work towards a future where all moms and babies
receive the care they need, regardless of their
geographic location, socioeconomic status, sexual
orientation, or racial background. Stakeholders at all
levels must collaborate to enact policy reforms, invest
in workforce development, and prioritize equity to
improve maternal health outcomes nationwide.

“My plan is... I actually think I’ll
give birth in my car.”
Claudia Torres lives in a maternity care desert and
has struggled with making it to the hospital in time
for all four of her birthing experiences.

Scan to learn more about her experience
living in rural Texas.

43

Abbreviations and definitions
AABC - American Association of Birth Centers
ACOG - American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
ACP - Affordable Connectivity Program
AI/AN - American Indian/Alaska Native
A/PI - Asian/Pacific Islander
APCU - Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization
ASRM - American Society for Reproductive Medicine
BMI - Body mass index
CABC - Commission for the Accreditation of Birth Centers
CDC - Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CM - Certified Midwife
CNM - Certified Nurse Midwife
FPL - Federal Poverty Level
HPSAs - Health Professional Shortage Areas
HRSA - Health Resources and Services Administration
MCD - Maternity care desert
MCTA - Maternity Care Target Area
MVI - Maternal Vulnerability Index
NICU - Neonatal intensive care unit
NHSC - National Health Service Corps
OB-GYN - Obstetrician-gynecologist
PMAD - Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders
PNC - Prenatal care
SDOH - Social drivers of health

44

Topic

Definition

Associated data source

Adequacy of
Prenatal Care
Utilization Index

An index to assess the timing and frequency of prenatal care
received by pregnant individuals.

National Center for Health
Statistics, Natality file

Birth center

A healthcare facility that follows the midwifery model of care
and provides maternity care to low-risk birthing people.

American Association of
Birth Centers

Body mass index

A measure calculated from an individual’s weight and height,
used to categorize underweight, normal weight, overweight,
and obesity.

National Center for Health
Statistics, Natality file

Certified NurseMidwife

A registered nurse with additional training in midwifery,
providing care to women throughout pregnancy, childbirth, and
postpartum period.

Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, National
Provider Identifier file,
American College of NurseMidwives

Certified Midwife

A midwife who meets specific educational and certification
requirements to provide care to women during pregnancy,
childbirth, and postpartum period.

Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, National
Provider Identifier file

Family physician

A doctor trained to care for common and chronic illnesses
among both children and adults with an emphasis on personcentered care and general wellbeing.

American Board of Family
Medicine

Federal Poverty
Level

US Census Bureau,
Measure used by the federal government to determine eligibility
American Community
for certain programs and benefits based on income.
Survey

Health
Professional
Shortage Area

Designation by HRSA indicating areas lacking primary medical
providers, impacting access to healthcare services.

Health Resources and
Services Administration,
Area Health Resources File

Maternity care
desert

A county with no birthing facilities or obstetric clinicians.

March of Dimes

Maternity Care
Target Area

Index score measuring the need for maternity care services in
counties, influencing placement of healthcare providers.

Health Resources and
Services Administration,
Primary Care Shortage
Area file

Maternal
Vulnerability
Index

An index used to assess and identify areas where moms
are vulnerable to poor health outcomes, helping to target
interventions and resources effectively.

Surgo Ventures

ObstetricianGynecologist

Health Resources and
A physician specializing in women’s health, particularly in
Services Administration,
pregnancy, childbirth, and disorders of the reproductive system.
Area Health Resources File

Obstetric hospital

A hospital with a dedicated maternity ward or labor and delivery American Hospital
unit.
Association, Annual Survey

Prenatal care

Healthcare services provided to pregnant individuals to monitor
pregnancy and ensure the health of mom and baby.

National Center for Health
Statistics, Natality file

Preterm birth

A live birth before 37 weeks gestation.

National Center for Health
Statistics, Natality file

45

References
1.

Institute of Medicine Committee on Monitoring Access to
Personal Health Care Services. Access to Health Care in America.
(Millman M, ed.). National Academies Press (US); 1993. Accessed
May 23, 2024. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK235882/

2.

What Is Shortage Designation? | Bureau of Health Workforce.
Accessed May 13, 2024. https://bhw.hrsa.gov/workforceshortage-areas/shortage-designation

3.

Corman H, Dave DM, Reichman N. Effects of Prenatal Care on
Birth Outcomes: Reconciling a Messy Literature. NBER Working
Paper No. 24885. Published August 2018. Accessed May 23,
2024. https://www.nber.org/papers/w24885

4.

Kotelchuck M. Overview of Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization
Index. Published online September 1994. https://www.
mchlibrary.org/databases/HSNRCPDFs/Overview_APCUIndex.
pdf

15.

Fischer SJ, Royer H, White CD. Health Care Centralization: The
Health Impacts of Obstetric Unit Closures in the US. Published
online June 1, 2022. https://www.nber.org/papers/w30141

16. Hung P, Kozhimannil KB, Casey MM, Moscovice IS. Why Are
Obstetric Units in Rural Hospitals Closing Their Doors? Health
Serv Res. 2016;51(4):1546-1560.
17.

Valencia Z, Sen A, Kurowski D, Martin K, Bozzi D. Average
Payments for Childbirth Among the Commercially Insured and
Fee-for-Service Medicaid. HCCI. Accessed May 23, 2024. https://
healthcostinstitute.org/hcci-originals-dropdown/all-hcci-reports/
average-payments-for-childbirth-among-the-commerciallyinsured-and-fee-for-service-medicaid

18. ACOG Policy Priorities: Payment Parity for Obstetric Services.
Accessed June 2, 2024. https://www.acog.org/advocacy/policypriorities/payment-parity-for-obstetric-services

5.

Gadson A, Akpovi E, Mehta PK. Exploring the social determinants
of racial/ethnic disparities in prenatal care utilization and
maternal outcome. Semin Perinatol. 2017;41(5):308-317.

19.

6.

Kotelchuck M. The Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization Index:
its US distribution and association with low birthweight. Am J
Public Health. 1994;84(9):1486-1489.

7.

What are the risk factors for preterm labor and birth? | NICHD
- Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development. Published May 9, 2023. Accessed May
23, 2024. https://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/preterm/
conditioninfo/who_risk

20. Moore JE, George KE, Bakst C, Shea K. Improving Maternal
Health Access, Coverage, and Outcomes in Medicaid: A
Resource for State Medicaid Agencies and Medicaid Managed
Care Organizations. Institute for Medicaid Innovation. Accessed
May 13, 2024. https://medicaidinnovation.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/11/2020-IMI-Improving_Maternal_Health_Access_
Coverage_and_Outcomes-Report-2.pdf

8.

Mohamoud YA, Cassidy E, Fuchs E, et al. Vital Signs: Maternity
Care Experiences - United States, April 2023. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;72(35):961-967.

9.

Sugar S, Peters C, De Lew N, Sommers BD. Medicaid Churning
and Continuity of Care: Evidence and Policy Considerations
Before and After the COVID-19 Pandemic (Issue Brief No.
HP-2021-10). Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services; 2021. https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/private/
pdf/265366/medicaid-churning-ib.pdf

10. Jones E, Lattof SR, Coast E. Interventions to provide culturallyappropriate maternity care services: factors affecting
implementation. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2017;17(1):267.
11.

Shmerling A, Hoss M, Malam N, Staton EW, Lyon C. Prenatal Care
via Telehealth. Prim Care. 2022;49(4):609-619.

12.

Lynch CD, Conroy S, Jackson KA, Smith RM, Hade EM. Access
to rideshare and satisfaction, prenatal healthcare utilisation,
and preterm delivery among pregnant Medicaid recipients:
A randomised controlled trial. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol.
2023;37(3):201-211.

13. Enns JE, Nickel NC, Chartier M, et al. An unconditional prenatal
income supplement is associated with improved birth and early
childhood outcomes among First Nations children in Manitoba,
Canada: a population-based cohort study. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth. 2021;21(1):312.
14. Lang AY, Boyle JA, Fitzgerald GL, et al. Optimizing preconception
health in women of reproductive age. Minerva Ginecol.
2018;70(1):99-119.

21.

MFM: Low-Risk Pregnancies | Obstetrics, Gynecology &
Reproductive Sciences. Accessed May 13, 2024. https://obgyn.
ucsf.edu/maternal-fetal-medicine/low-risk-pregnancies

Alliman J, Bauer K, Williams T. Freestanding Birth Centers: An
Evidence-Based Option for Birth. J Perinat Educ. 2022;31(1):8-13.

22. Almanza JI, Karbeah J ’Mag, Tessier KM, et al. The Impact
of Culturally-Centered Care on Peripartum Experiences
of Autonomy and Respect in Community Birth Centers: A
Comparative Study. Matern Child Health J. 2022;26(4):895-904.
23. Howell E, Palmer A, Benatar S, Garrett B. Potential Medicaid
cost savings from maternity care based at a freestanding birth
center. Medicare Medicaid Res Rev. 2014;4(3):mmrr2014-00403-a06.
24. Courtot B, Hill I, Cross-Barnet C, Markell J. Midwifery and Birth
Centers Under State Medicaid Programs: Current Limits to
Beneficiary Access to a High-Value Model of Care. Milbank Q.
2020;98(4):1091-1113.
25. BC Regulations - American Association of Birth Centers.
Accessed May 13, 2024. https://www.birthcenters.org/bcregulations
26. Knox-Kazimierczuk F, Trinh S, Odems D, Shockley-Smith M.
Challenges and lessons learned birthing during the COVID-19
pandemic: A scoping review. Health Sci Rep. 2023;6(7):e1387.
27. Sakala C, Hernández-Cancio S, Wei R. Improving Our Maternity
Care Now Through Community Birth Settings. J Perinat Educ.
2022;31(4):184-187.
28. Projections of Supply and Demand for Women’s Health Service
Providers: 2018-2030. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Health Resources and Services Administration,
National Center for Health Workforce Analysis; 2021. Accessed
May 14, 2024. https://bhw.hrsa.gov/sites/default/files/
bureau-health-workforce/data-research/projections-supplydemand-2018-2030.pdf

46

29. The State of the World’s Midwifery 2021. United Nations
Population Fund https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pubpdf/21-038-UNFPA-SoWMy2021-Report-ENv4302_0.pdf

47. Barker AR, Li L. The cumulative impact of health insurance on
health status. Health Serv Res. 2020;55 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):815822.

30. Rayburn WF. The Obstetrician-Gynecologist Workforce in the
United States: Facts, Figures, and Implications, 2017. American
Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2017.

48. Tolbert J, Drake P, Damico A. Key Facts about the Uninsured
Population. Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). Published December
18, 2023. Accessed May 9, 2024. https://www.kff.org/uninsured/
issue-brief/key-facts-about-the-uninsured-population/

31. Sabbath EL, McKetchnie SM, Arora KS, Buchbinder M. US
Obstetrician-Gynecologists’ Perceived Impacts of PostDobbs v Jackson State Abortion Bans. JAMA Netw Open.
2024;7(1):e2352109.
32. Cahan E. Lawsuits, Reimbursement, and Liability InsuranceFacing the Realities of a Post-Roe Era. JAMA. 2022;328(6):515517.
33. Hammoud MM, Morgan HK, George K, et al. Trends in
Obstetrics and Gynecology Residency Applications in the
Year After Abortion Access Changes. JAMA Netw Open.
2024;7(2):e2355017.
34. Vinekar K, Karlapudi A, Bauer CC, et al. Abortion training in U.S.
obstetrics and gynecology residency programs in a post-Dobbs
era. Contraception. 2024;130:110291.
35. Rosenblatt RA, Cherkin DC, Schneeweiss R, et al. The structure
and content of family practice: current status and future trends.
J Fam Pract. 1982;15(4):681-722.
36. HHS Invests $11 Million to Expand Medical Residencies in Rural
Communities. Published July 26, 2023. Accessed May 14, 2024.
https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2023/07/26/hhs-invests-11million-expand-medical-residencies-rural-communities.html
37. Barreto TW, Eden A, Hansen ER, Peterson LE. Opportunities and
Barriers for Family Physician Contribution to the Maternity Care
Workforce. Fam Med. 2019;51(5):383-388.
38. Defining Competent Maternal and Newborn Health Professionals.
World Health Organization; 2018. https://iris.who.int/bitstream/
handle/10665/272817/9789241514200-eng.pdf
39. A Brief History of Midwifery in America | OHSU. Accessed May
14, 2024. https://www.ohsu.edu/womens-health/brief-historymidwifery-america

49. Daw JR, MacCallum-Bridges CL, Kozhimannil KB, Admon LK.
Continuous Medicaid Eligibility During the COVID-19 Pandemic
and Postpartum Coverage, Health Care, and Outcomes. JAMA
Health Forum. 2024;5(3):e240004.
50. Margerison CE, MacCallum CL, Chen J, Zamani-Hank Y, Kaestner
R. Impacts of Medicaid Expansion on Health Among Women of
Reproductive Age. Am J Prev Med. 2020;58(1):1-11.
51.

Medicaid and CHIP Income Eligibility Limits for Pregnant
Women as a Percent of the Federal Poverty Level. Kaiser Family
Foundation (KFF). Accessed May 9, 2024. https://www.kff.org/
affordable-care-act/state-indicator/medicaid-and-chip-incomeeligibility-limits-for-pregnant-women-as-a-percent-of-thefederal-poverty-level/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22
colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D

52. Johnson K, Posner SF, Biermann J, et al. Recommendations to
improve preconception health and health care--United States. A
report of the CDC/ATSDR Preconception Care Work Group and
the Select Panel on Preconception Care. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2006;55(RR-6):1-23.
53. Community-Based Models to Improve Maternal Health
Outcomes and Promote Health Equity. The Commonwealth
Fund. Published March 4, 2021. Accessed May 9, 2024. https://
www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2021/
mar/community-models-improve-maternal-outcomes-equity
54. Gordon SH, Lee S, Steenland MW, Deen N, Feinberg E. Extended
Postpartum Medicaid in Colorado Associated with Increased
Treatment for Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders. Health Aff
(MIllwood). 2024;43(4):523-531.

40. Sandall J, Fernandez Turienzo C, Devane D, et al. Midwife
continuity of care models versus other models of care
for childbearing women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2024;4(4):CD004667.

55. Trost SL, Beauregard J, Chandra G, et al. Pregnancy-Related
Deaths: Data from Maternal Mortality Review Committees in
36 US States, 2017–2019. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services;
2022. Accessed May 9, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/maternalmortality/php/data-research/index.html

41. Guerra-Reyes L, Hamilton LJ. Racial disparities in birth care:
Exploring the perceived role of African-American women
providing midwifery care and birth support in the United States.
Women Birth. 2017;30(1):e9-e16.

56. Medicaid Postpartum Coverage Extension Tracker. Kaiser Family
Foundation (KFF). Published May 7, 2024. Accessed May 9, 2024.
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/medicaid-postpartumcoverage-extension-tracker/

42. Hayward A, Cidro J. Indigenous Birth as Ceremony and a Human
Right. Health Hum Rights. 2021;23(1):213-224.
43. Vedam S, Stoll K, MacDorman M, et al. Mapping integration of
midwives across the United States: Impact on access, equity,
and outcomes. PLoS One. 2018;13(2):e0192523.

57. Status of State Medicaid Expansion Decisions: Interactive
Map. Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). Published May 8, 2024.
Accessed May 9, 2024. https://www.kff.org/affordable-care-act/
issue-brief/status-of-state-medicaid-expansion-decisionsinteractive-map/

44. Vanderlaan J. Access to Midwifery Care National Chartbook.
Accessed May 22, 2024. https://www.midwife.org/midwiferyworkforce

58. Roa L, Uribe-Leitz T, Fallah PN, et al. Travel Time to Access
Obstetric and Neonatal Care in the United States. Obstet
Gynecol. 2020;136(3):610-612.

45. Baker MV, Butler-Tobah YS, Famuyide AO, Theiler RN. Medicaid
Cost and Reimbursement for Low-Risk Prenatal Care in the
United States. J Midwifery Womens Health. 2021;66(5):589-596.

59. Minion SC, Krans EE, Brooks MM, Mendez DD, Haggerty
CL. Association of Driving Distance to Maternity Hospitals
and Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes. Obstet Gynecol.
2022;140(5):812-819.

46. Herndon A, Vanderlaan J. Associations Between State Practice
Regulations and Access to Midwifery Care. J Midwifery Womens
Health. 2024;69(1):17-24.

47

60. Gutvirtz G, Wainstock T, Landau D, Sheiner E. Unplanned Outof-Hospital Birth-Short and Long-Term Consequences for the
Offspring. J Clin Med. 2020;9(2):339.
61. Örtqvist AK, Haas J, Ahlberg M, Norman M, Stephansson O.
Association between travel time to delivery unit and unplanned
out-of-hospital birth, infant morbidity and mortality: A
population-based cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand.
2021;100(8):1478-1489.
62. Kozhimannil KB, Hung P, Henning-Smith C, Casey MM, Prasad S.
Association Between Loss of Hospital-Based Obstetric Services
and Birth Outcomes in Rural Counties in the United States.
JAMA. 2018;319(12):1239-1247.
63. ESRI. Optimized Hot Spot Analysis (Spatial Statistics)—ArcGIS
Pro. Accessed May 24, 2024. https://pro.arcgis.com/en/proapp/3.1/tool-reference/spatial-statistics/optimized-hot-spotanalysis.htm
64. Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Osterman MJK. Births: Provisional
Data for 2023. Vital Statistics Rapid Release; No 35. April 2024.
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/vsrr/vsrr035.pdf
65. Chandra-Mouli V, Akwara E. Improving access to and use of
contraception by adolescents: What progress has been made,
what lessons have been learnt, and what are the implications for
action? Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2020;66:107-118.
66. Oberhauser AM. Women in the U.S. are having fewer babies.
What’s driving this trend? World Economic Forum. Published
July 9, 2021. Accessed May 13, 2024. https://www.weforum.org/
agenda/2021/07/declining-fertility-rates-research/
67. Dench D, Pineda-Torres M, Myers CK. The Effects of the Dobbs
Decision on Fertility. IZA Discussion Paper No. 16608. Published
November 27, 2023. Accessed May 13, 2024. https://papers.ssrn.
com/abstract=4636864
68. Barfield WD, Warner L. Preventing chronic disease in women
of reproductive age: opportunities for health promotion and
preventive services. Prev Chronic Dis. 2012;9:E34.
69. Stanhope KK, Worrell N, Jamieson DJ, Geary FH, Boulet SL.
Double, Triple, and Quadruple Jeopardy: Entering Pregnancy
with Two or More Multimorbid Diagnoses and Increased Risk
of Severe Maternal Morbidity and Postpartum Readmission.
Womens Health Issues. 2022;32(6):607-614.
70. Mitanchez D, Yzydorczyk C, Simeoni U. What neonatal
complications should the pediatrician be aware of in case of
maternal gestational diabetes? World J Diabetes. 2015;6(5):734743.
71.

Madi SRC, Garcia RMR, Souza VC de, Rombaldi RL, Araújo BF
de, Madi JM. Effect of Obesity on Gestational and Perinatal
Outcomes. Rev Bras Ginecol E Obstet. 2017;39(7):330-336.

72. Hayes DK, Robbins CL, Ko JY. Trends in Selected Chronic
Conditions and Related Risk Factors Among Women of
Reproductive Age: Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System,
2011-2017. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2020;29(12):1576-1585.
73. Admon LK, Winkelman TNA, Moniz MH, Davis MM, Heisler M,
Dalton VK. Disparities in Chronic Conditions Among Women
Hospitalized for Delivery in the United States, 2005-2014. Obstet
Gynecol. 2017;130(6):1319-1326.
74. Temkin SM, Barr E, Moore H, Caviston JP, Regensteiner JG,
Clayton JA. Chronic conditions in women: the development of
a National Institutes of health framework. BMC Womens Health.
2023;23(1):162.

75. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 762: Prepregnancy Counseling.
Obstet Gynecol. 2019;133(1):e78-e89.
76. US Department of Health and Human Services. Social
Determinants of Health. Healthy People 2030. Accessed May
23, 2024. https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/socialdeterminants-health
77.

Grobman WA, Entringer S, Headen I, et al. Social determinants of
health and obstetric outcomes: A report and recommendations
of the workshop of the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2024;230(2):B2-B16.

78. Kramer MR, Strahan AE, Preslar J, et al. Changing the
conversation: applying a health equity framework to maternal
mortality reviews. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2019;221(6):609.e1-609.
e9.
79. Dagher RK, Linares DE. A Critical Review on the Complex
Interplay between Social Determinants of Health and Maternal
and Infant Mortality. Child Basel Switz. 2022;9(3):394.
80. Salazar EG, Montoya-Williams D, Passarella M, et al. County-Level
Maternal Vulnerability and Preterm Birth in the US. JAMA Netw
Open. 2023;6(5):e2315306.
81. McLemore MR, D’Efilippo V. To Prevent Women from Dying
in Childbirth, First Stop Blaming Them. Scientific American.
Published May 1, 2019. Accessed May 23, 2024. https://www.
scientificamerican.com/article/to-prevent-women-from-dyingin-childbirth-first-stop-blaming-them/
82. Larrabee Sonderlund A, Schoenthaler A, Thilsing T. The
Association between Maternal Experiences of Interpersonal
Discrimination and Adverse Birth Outcomes: A Systematic
Review of the Evidence. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
2021;18(4):1465.
83. Valerio VC, Downey J, Sgaier SK, Callaghan WM, Hammer B,
Smittenaar P. Black-White disparities in maternal vulnerability
and adverse pregnancy outcomes: an ecological population
study in the United States, 2014-2018. Lancet Reg Health Am.
2023;20:100456.
84. Crear-Perry J, Correa-de-Araujo R, Lewis Johnson T, McLemore
MR, Neilson E, Wallace M. Social and Structural Determinants
of Health Inequities in Maternal Health. J Womens Health 2002.
2021;30(2):230-235.
85. Malawa Z, Gaarde J, Spellen S. Racism as a Root
Cause Approach: A New Framework. Pediatrics.
2021;147(1):e2020015602.
86. Liu SR, Glynn LM. The contribution of racism-related stress
and adversity to disparities in birth outcomes: evidence and
research recommendations. F S Rep. 2022;3(2 Suppl):5-13.
87. Hux VJ, Catov JM, Roberts JM. Allostatic load in women
with a history of low birth weight infants: the national
health and nutrition examination survey. J Womens Health.
2014;23(12):1039-1045.
88. Clark A, Wescott P, Mitchell N, Mahdi I, Crear-Perry J. Centering
equity: addressing structural and social determinants of
health to improve maternal and infant health outcomes. Semin
Perinatol. 2022;46(8):151661.
89. Smith TM. How legacy of medical racism shapes U.S. health
care today. American Medical Association. Published January
31, 2022. Accessed May 23, 2024. https://www.ama-assn.org/
delivering-care/health-equity/how-legacy-medical-racismshapes-us-health-care-today

48

90. Chambers BD, Taylor B, Nelson T, et al. Clinicians’ Perspectives
on Racism and Black Women’s Maternal Health. Womens Health
Rep (New Rochelle). 2022;3(1):476-482.
91. Alhusen JL, Bower KM, Epstein E, Sharps P. Racial Discrimination
and Adverse Birth Outcomes: An Integrative Review. J Midwifery
Womens Health. 2016;61(6):707-720.
92. Beach MC, Saha S, Park J, et al. Testimonial Injustice: Linguistic
Bias in the Medical Records of Black Patients and Women. J Gen
Intern Med. 2021;36(6):1708-1714.
93. Sim W, Lim WH, Ng CH, et al. The perspectives of health
professionals and patients on racism in healthcare: A qualitative
systematic review. PLoS One. 2021;16(8):e0255936.
94. Ben J, Cormack D, Harris R, Paradies Y. Racism and health
service utilisation: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS
One. 2017;12(12):e0189900.
95. Ford TN, Michener J. Medicaid Reimbursement Rates Are a
Racial Justice Issue. The Commonwealth Fund. Published
June 16, 2022. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://www.
commonwealthfund.org/blog/2022/medicaid-reimbursementrates-are-racial-justice-issue
96. Dunn A, Gottlieb J, Shapiro A, Sonnenstuhl DJ, Tebaldi P. A Denial
a Day Keeps the Doctor Away. BFI Working Paper. Accessed June
25, 2024. https://bfi.uchicago.edu/working-paper/2021-80/

106. Cunningham SD, Herrera C, Udo IE, et al. Maternal Medical
Complexity: Impact on Prenatal Health Care Spending among
Women at Low Risk for Cesarean Section. Womens Health
Issues. 2017;27(5):551-558.
107. Kerby T, Bidgood R, Le D. Why effective maternity care requires
an innovative, value-based strategy. HFMA. Published October
22, 2020. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://www.hfma.org/
payment-reimbursement-and-managed-care/value-basedpayment/why-effective-maternity-care-requires-an-innovativevalue-based/
108. Hill I, Dubay L, Courtot B, et al. Strong Start for Mothers and
Newborns Evaluation: Year 5 Project Synthesis. Volume 1: CrossCutting Findings. Urban Institute Accessed June 26, 2024.
https://downloads.cms.gov/files/cmmi/strongstart-prenatalfinalevalrpt-v1.pdf
109. Williams T, Bixiones C, Standard V, Orton R. How Freestanding
Birth Centers Can Health Solve the Maternal Health Crisis in the
U.S. Maternal Health Learning & Innovation Center. Accessed
June 26, 2024. https://maternalhealthlearning.org/resources/
how-freestanding-birth-centers-can-health-solve-the-maternalhealth-crisis-in-the-u-s/

97. The Cost of Having a Baby in the United States. Truven Health
Analytics; 2013. https://nationalpartnership.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/02/the-cost-of-having-a-baby-in-the-us.pdf

110. Moore JE. New Roadmap & Checklist on High-Value, EvidenceBased Maternal Models of Care in Medicaid. Institute for
Medicaid Innovation. Published May 21, 2021. Accessed June 26,
2024. https://medicaidinnovation.org/new-roadmap-checkliston-high-value-evidence-based-maternal-models-of-care-inmedicaid/

98. Hung P, Henning-Smith CE, Casey MM, Kozhimannil KB. Access
to Obstetric Services in Rural Counties Still Declining, with
9 Percent Losing Services, 2004-14. Health Aff (Millwood).
2017;36(9):1663-1671.

111. Getting Payment Right: How to Unlock High-Value Care Through
Appropriate Birth Center Reimbursement. American Association
of Birth Centers. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://www.
birthcenters.org/products/getting-payment-right

99. Ranji U, Salganicoff A, Published IG. Postpartum Coverage
Extension in the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021. Kaiser Family
Foundation (KFF). Published March 18, 2021. Accessed June 26,
2024. https://www.kff.org/policy-watch/postpartum-coverageextension-in-the-american-rescue-plan-act-of-2021/

112. Jeffers NK. Confronting the Issue of Maternity Care Deserts.
Published August 28, 2023. Accessed June 26, 2024. https://
nursing.jhu.edu/magazine/articles/2023/08/confronting-theissue-of-maternity-care-deserts/

100. Preconception health | Office on Women’s Health. Accessed
June 26, 2024. https://www.womenshealth.gov/pregnancy/youget-pregnant/preconception-health
101. Myerson R, Crawford S, Wherry LR. Medicaid Expansion
Increased Preconception Health Counseling, Folic Acid
Intake, and Postpartum Contraception. Health Aff (Millwood).
2020;39(11):1883-1890.
102. Lindrooth RC, Perraillon MC, Hardy RY, Tung GJ. Understanding
the Relationship Between Medicaid Expansions and Hospital
Closures. Health Aff (Millwood). 2018;37(1):111-120.
103. Opportunities to Improve Maternal Health Through Value-Based
Payments. AHIP. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://www.ahip.org/
resources/opportunities-to-improve-maternal-health-throughvalue-based-payments
104. Realizing the Transformational Potential of Maternity Care
Payment Reform. National Partnership for Women & Families;
2024. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://nationalpartnership.org/
wp-content/uploads/maternityAPM-report.pdf

113. Vanderlaan J, Jefferson K. Midwifery Policy Toolkit.
American College of Nurse-Midwives. Accessed June 26,
2024. https://www.midwife.org/acnm/files/cclibraryfiles/
filename/000000009130/2024_policy_advocacy_toolkit_final.
pdf
114. Availability of Hospital-Based Obstetric Care in Rural Areas. GAO
(U.S. Government Accountability Office); 2022. Accessed June
25, 2024. https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-23-105515.pdf
115. A Framework for Defining Telehealth. Telehealth Resource
Centers. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://cdn.cchpca.org/
files/2018-10/Telehealth%20Definintion%20Framework%20
for%20TRCs_0.pdf
116. DeNicola N, Grossman D, Marko K, et al. Telehealth Interventions
to Improve Obstetric and Gynecologic Health Outcomes: A
Systematic Review. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;135(2):371-382.
117. Affordable Connectivity Program | Federal Communications
Commission. Accessed June 26, 2024. https://www.fcc.gov/acp

105. Value-Based Payment for Maternity Care in Medicaid: Findings
from Five States. MACPAC. Accessed June 25, 2024. https://
www.macpac.gov/publication/value-based-payment-formaternity-care-in-medicaid-findings-from-five-states/

49

